INJECTION MOLDING 
The injection molding of thermoplastics is a 
process by which the plastic material is melted 
and then injected into the mold cavity. Once 
the melted plastic is in the mold, it cools to a shape 
that reflects the cavity and core. 
The resulting form usually is a finished part, needing 
no other work before assembly into or use as a 
finished product. Many details, such as bosses, ribs, 
holes, and screw threads can be formed during the 
one-step injection molding operation. 
The types of products produced by the injection 
process are almost too numerous to list. These 
products range from small drive wheels used in audio 
cassettes to body panels for automobiles. 
A detailed study of the operation of the injection 
molding machine is covered next. 
There are three basic types of injection molding 
machines in current operation. They are: the 
hydraulic machine, the hydraulic toggle machine. and 
the totally electric toggle machine. 
The Hydraulic Machine has one large cylinder in 
the center of the moveable platen with no mechanical 
advantage applied. It requires the most energy to 
operate and generates the most heat of the three 
machine types. 
The Hydraulic Toggle Machine is covered in 
detail later in this chapter. It is more energy efficient 
than the hydraulic machine. 
The Total Electric Machine generally has no 
hydraulic pumps. It is basically a toggle machine 
with the toggle being actuated by a servo motor used 
with a reduction drive gear to achieve the needed 
forces. All injection movement is also controlled by 
servo motors. A disadvantage is that it is relatively 
slower than either of the other two types of machines. 
The advantages are that it is much more stable since 
it has no hydraulic system to generate heat and the 
servo motors provide extemely accurate movement of 
the machine components. It is also much cleaner to 
operate than the other types of molding machines. 
PLASTIC INJECTION COMPONENTS 
1. HOPPER - The hopper is mounted on top of the 
injection unit and holds the plastic in its granulated 
fonn. It feeds the plastic into the injection unit. 
Plastic may be manually placed into the hopper or 
an apparatus may be installed which will 
automatically feed the plastic material into it. The 
material is gravity fed into the screw flights. This 
area is water cooled to prevent the melted plastic 
from feeding back into the plastic granules. (ref. page 
2-7) 
2. SCREW MOTOR - The screw motor is used to 
rotate the auger screw, forcing the plastic (granular) 
to advance along the flights toward the nozzle. The 
number of turns the screw motor is rotated as well 
as the pitch of the screw flights dictate how much 
plastic may be fed into the mold (up to but not to 
exceed the capacity of the molding machine itself). 
The screw motor may therefore be considered a 
metering device. 
3. INJECTION UNIT - The injection unit is made 
up of the carriage, the ban•el, the auger screw, the 
hydraulic cylinders, and the bairel heaters. The 
injection unit melts the plastic and injects it into the 
mold. (A more detailed description may be found on 
page 2-6) 
4. BARREL - The barrel houses the injection 
screw and is wrapped with heater bands. The molten 
plastic is forced through the barrel and out of the 
nozzle into the mold. 
(A more detailed description may be found on pages 
2-6 & 2-7) 
5. NOZZLE - The nozzle is the tip of the injection 
unit which mates with the mold base thus allowing 
for the flow of the molten plastic into the mold. The 
nozzle usually has a radiused (rounded) tip to allow it 
to center into the mold. 
MOLD CLAMPING AND EJECTION COMPONENTS 
1. STATIONARY PLATEN - The stationary 
platen is the non-moveable platen with the "A" side 
of the mold attached. The nozzle protrudes through 
the platen to mate with the mold. In those machines 
Illnning molds with hot manifolds, the stationary 
platen should be water cooled. 
2. NOTCHED SAFETY BAR This is a safety 
feature found on most molding machines. The 
notched safety bar is generally attached to the 
moveable platen. When properly adjusted, it will not 
allow the moveable platen to move fonvard until the 
operator guard door is closed. This action lifts the 
safety drop bar from the path of the notched safety 
bar which allows the moveable platen to close. 
3. MOVEABLE PLATEN - The moveable platen 
is the platen that the "B Il side of the mold is attached 
to. It moves horizontally on the tie-bars and applies 
clamping force to the mold. It also holds the ejector 
system. 
4. EJECTOR SYSTEM Through the use of an 
independent hydraulic ram, the ejector system pushes 
on the ejector plate in the mold ejecting the parts 
from the mold at a specified time in the molding 
cycle. (A more detailed description of the ejector 
system is found on page 2-9). 
5. EJECTOR CYLINDER - The ejector cylinder 
is the hydraulic ram that applies force to the ejector 
system which in tum, evacuates the molded plastic 
pmts from the mold. 
6. CLAMP TOGGLE Through pressure applied 
to the clamp toggle by the clamp cylinder, the clamp 
toggle applies the force that holds the moveable 
platen in the forward position thereby clamping the 
mold closed. (A more detailed description is found on 
page 2-8). 
7. TIE-BAR - The tie-bars support the platens and 
keep them parallel and pelpendicular to each other. 
This, in turn, assur.s that the mold will remain 
parallel and perpendicular for accurate alignment and 
minimum wear on shut-off surfaces. The tie-bars 
also guide the moveable platen through the opening 
and closing sequence in the molding cycle. 
8. TIE-BAR ADJUSTMENT 
With the 
tremendous forces being applied to the tie-bars 
during clamping (10 to over 1,000 tons of pressure) 
the tie-bars will stretch. therefore, they must be 
adjusted periodically to keep the platens tlue. 
9. CLAMP CYLINDER - The clamp cylinder is 
the hydraulic ram which provides the force needed 
to close the mold and lock the toggles during the 
molding cycle. It also opens the mold in order to 
provide for plastic part ejection following the 
injection and cooling cycles. 
10. CLAMP ADJUSTING RING GEAR This 
motor driven bull gear engages all four tie bar 
adjusting nuts 
in order to actuate them 
simultaneously when rotated. The ring gear drive 
motor is confrolled through the molding machine 
CPU in the set-up position. 
When new molds are set into the machine, the ring 
gear is backed off sufficiently to allow the moveable 
platen to move toward the mold (by actuating the 
clamp cylinder) and lock the clamp toggles without 
contacting the mold. At this point, the ring gear is 
rotated until the moveable platen makes contact 
with the mold. The clamp toggle is then backed off. 
This action opens the mold at the P/L. The ring gear 
is then adjusted toward the mold until the desired 
clamp force is achieved when the toggles are locked. 
11. 
DRIVE UNIT - The drive unit contains the 
motors, pumps, solenoids, valves, and reservoirs 
needed to keep the molding machine operational. 
12. 
CONTROL PANEL - The control panel 
contains the electrical circuitiY and controls ne e d e d 
to operate the injection, ejection, clamping, cycling 
and safety systems of the molding machine.
INJECTION MOLD AND AUXILIARY COMPONENTS 
1. WATER MANIFOLD - Hoses connect the 
manifold to the water circuits in the mold to provide 
cooling so that the plastic solidifies into the desired 
form in as short a period of time as possible. There 
are both water feed and return lines in the manifold. 
Feed lines are usually blue and return lines red in 
color. 
2. AIR MANIFOLD - Some molded parts require 
air assisted ejection to fall free from the mold. Air 
nozzles from the air manifold are mounted on or 
intemally machined within the mold to apply a small 
jet of air at ejection. Occasionally valve gates in Hot 
Manifold systems are air actuated. These may need 
to be activated in both open and close directions. 
These are just two applications for which the air 
manifold may be used. The solenoids, which activate 
the air manifold, are usually controlled by the Central 
Processing Unit (CPU) in the molding machine. 
3. MOLD The mold is shown in the above 
illustration from a top-view to illustrate the position 
of the ejector housing. The housing is normally 
mounted in the vertical plane to prevent debris from 
catching on the ejector plates and restricting ejection. 
Covers are sometimes mounted over this area to 
prevent plastic parts, granules, or other debris from 
entering the ejector housing. 
4. MOLD CLAMPS A minü-num of eight (8) 
clamps are generally required to hang the mold in the 
molding machine (4 on each mold half). They are 
bolted to the platens and clamped into the clamp slots 
in the mold base. The mold must be aligned to the 
ejector bars radially prior to tightening the mold 
clamps. 
5. HYDRAULIC MANNOLD - When a mold 
requires hydraulic pressure, i.e., unscrewing rack, 
hydraulic slides. etc., the molding machine can 
provide the hydraulic pressure via the hydraulic 
manifold. The sequence of the hydraulic in and out 
activation is controlled within the molding cycle by 
the CPU of the molding machine.
This portion of the injection molding machine is 
called the injection unit or the "sled". 
It gets its 
nickname because the entire unit can hydraulically 
slide away from the mold along tracks or rails. This 
is necessary to allow access to the nozzle. When 
changing plastic resin type, getting rid of 
contaminated or degraded material (due to it being in 
the barrel at melt temperature for a prolonged period 
of time) it is necessary to purge the material from the 
ban•el before it enters the mold. The injection unit 
must be moved away from the mold to accomplish 
the purging action. The injection unit position must 
also be adjustable because sprue bushing seat 
positions may vary mold to mold. 
Injection unit sizes are called out based on the 
maximum amount of plastic material they can 
dispense with one forward stroke of the injection 
screw plunger assembly. For example, a 20 ounce 
injection unit is capable of injecting a maximum of 
20 ounces of plastic into a mold in each shot. Plastic 
matelial may be injected into a mold in amounts less 
than 20 ounces by metering less material in front of 
the screw before injecting.

The plasticizing unit of the Inolding machine is made 
up of a heated barrel, nozzle, reciprocating screw, 
check ring, hydraulic cylinder(s), and rotary 
hydraulic motor. 
The reciprocating screw is attached directly to the 
hydraulic ram at the end of the unit. The ram is also 
connected to a hydraulic motor which gives the 
system two separate motions. The screw can be 
pushed forward as a plunger or it can be rotated as an 
auger. 

The actual injection sequence staffs in the middle, in 
other words there must be melted plastic (metered 
plastic material) at the front of the screw to start the 
sequence (as illustrated). *Ihe reciprocating screw is 
pushed forward. acting as a plunger to push the 
melted plastic through the nozzle and into the mold. 
This is done at very high pressure. During the 
injection, the check ring closes so that the melted 
plastic in front of the screw is sealed off and cannot 
escape back down the flights of the screw. 
When the mold is full, the injection pressure is kept 
up to force even more plastic into the mold to make 
up for the shrinkage that occurs as the plastic cools. 
This process is called "packing" and is accomplished 
in the hold sequence of the molding cycle. Packing is 
only effective until gates in the mold cavities solidify 
or "freeze-off. 'f 
When the packing process is complete and the mold 
is held closed during the cooling cycle, the 
reciprocating screw begins to rotate, moving the 
check ring off its seat and advancing more plastic 
along its flights to the front of the screw. Since the 
plastic has nowhere to go, it builds up pressure which 
pushes the screw back. If the screw were allowed to 
back up without resistance there would not be 
sufficient compression of the plastic to generate heat 
and compact the plastic; therefore, a small amount of 
hydraulic pressure is kept behind the screw to 
provide some resistance. This is done through a 
restriction on the return line of the hydraulic screw 
motor. 
The back pressure (compression) and the shear of the 
plastic as it moves past the screw flights while the 
screw rotates generate friction. This compression 
and friction generate heat which accounts for up to 
70% of the heat needed to melt the plastic. The rest 
of the needed heat is provided by the heater bands 
which sunound the barrel. Thermocouples are 
incozporated to control the amount of additional heat 
applied. 
When the ban•el has melted enough plastic for the 
next shot, the screw will have been pushed back 
through screw rotation and back pressure, as 
described above, to a predetermined position. This 
can be witnessed by looking at the plastic metering 
indicator (shown on page 2-6). At this point the 
rotation stops. The mold is opened following the 
allotted cooling time. The plastic parts are evacuated 
from the mold and the mold closes. The screw is 
again used as a plunger to inject the next shot of 
melted plastic into the mold as tlle cycle repeats. 

Toggle Clamp Injection Molding Machines are the 
most common in use today palticularly in the smaller 
tonnage machines. The toggle clamps are popular 
since they are relatively inexpensive to manufacture. 
They are also more economical to operate than a 
hydraulic clamp machine since smaller hydraulic 
pumps and cylinders are required. A hydraulic clamp 
machine requires a very large cylinder in the center 
of the platen to apply full clamp tonnage with 
hydraulic pressure only and no mechanical 
advantage. (This variation is not illustrated). The 
toggle clamp machine features include; a high 
mechanical advantage at lockup, built-in clamp slow- 
down, slow mold breakaway, and rapid clamp 
operation. The clamp cylinder moves the crosshead 
forward, extending the toggle links and moving the 
moveable platen forward. As the clamp closes, the 
mechanical advantage is low, resulting in rapid platen 
movement. As the platen approaches the mold-close 
position, the toggle links move from a high-speed/low 
mechanical advantage to a low-speed/high 
mechanical advantage. This low speed is critical for 
mold protection and high mechanical advantage is 
necessary to provide the needed clamping pressure, 
Once the linkage is fully extended, hydraulic pressure 
is not needed to hold the tonnage. It is important to 
note that the tie bars are slightly longer in the 
clamped state than they are in the static state relative 
to the tonnage being applied. 

To open the clamp, hydraulic pressure is applied to 
the opposite side of the clamp cylinder, slowly 
opening the mold to prevent damage to the molded 
pms. The entire sequence is controlled by the CPU 
in the molding machine. 

 
In this, the final phase of the molding cycle, the 
plastic parts are evacuated or ejected from the mold. 
The injection mold is generally designed so that the 
plastic pans stay with the "B" side of the mold upon 
mold opening. 
When the moveable platen opens the mold at the 
parting line (P/L) to the point that the plastic parts 
may be ejected, the moveable platen stops and the 
ejection cylinder is energized. The ejection cylinder 
then activates the ejector platen. The movement of 
the ejector platen is transferred to the ejector system 
within the mold itself by the ejector rods. The mold 
ejector system in turn ejects the plastic parts from the 
mold. This completes the molding cycle. 
To speed up the molding cycle, many times the 
ejection is activated "On the Fly". When the parting 
fine opens and the parts clear the "A" side of the 
mold, the ejection is activated so that the parts are 
free of the mold by the time the opening motion 
stops. In this way, the mold does not have to stay 
open while the parts are ejected but may be 
immediately closed. 
In other cases, the ejection is not activated until a 
robot comes in contact with the parts. This delay 
allows the parts to be removed without being 
damaged or may be done for orientation purposes in 
assembly equipment. As with the other phases of the 
molding cycle previously covered, the ejection is 
controlled by the CPU of the molding machine.
SUMMARY 
The basic Mold Sequencing Operation is as follows: 
 
1.The moveable half of the mold closes on the stationary half of the mold with enough 
clamping pressure to hold both halves together without P/L flash during the injection 
of the plastic. 
2.Plastic is injected into the mold and packed. 
3.The mold stays closed long enough to allow the molten plastic to solidify while the 
injection unit rotates and feeds material for the next shot into position. 
4.The mold is then opened and the pan is ejected. 
5.The cycle repeats. 

MOLDING PROCESSES 
s with plastic materials, there are a wide 
variety of plastic processes. Of these 
various processes, there are seven that are 
most common. These include; cxtrusion molding, 
compression / transfer molding, thermoforming, 
extrusion-blow molding, injection stretch-blow 
molding, rotational molding, and injection molding. 
The selection of which process to use is related to 
cost. shape, product design/detai_l and to the volume 
of product to be produced. The highest volume, 
lowest cost per item producer of plastic components 
is injection molding. It is also the most expensive 
process in which to manufacture the mold. As you 
will leam in a later chapter, there are scveral 
moldmaking techniques that affect the price, 
performance, and volume of production. 
Several of the aforementioned processes share one 
thing in common, the extruder. 
It is a major 
component in the injection, extrusion, blow molding, 
and injection stretch-blow molding processes yet the 
products produced from these processes are totally 
different. On the other hand, the products produced 
by the thermoforming or compression molding 
processes are somewhat similar. Rotational molding 
is probably the slowest process and most intriguing 
because of the size and shapes of the products it can 
produce. 
Injection molding, extrusion molding, blow molding, 
injection suetch-blow molding, and rotational 
molding all utilize plastic material generally in a 
pellet form. Thermoforming and compression 
molding begin with a sheet or puck of plastic that is 
heated and (hen draped or compressed into the 
desired shape. 
The following process descriptions are based on the 
basic fundamentals of each process. 
Several 
processes have additional features that can be added 
to the equipment to enhance lhe speed of operation, 
size, or control the actual process. 
Each of these processes allows a company to 
manufacture its product based on the volumes it can 
SCI]. For example, a start-up company wants to 
market a product. a picture frame, but has limited 
capital to produce and sell milfions. With a minor 
investment of capital. this product could bc extruded. 
The major drawback would be that the product would 
have to be hand assembled, requiring labor costs 
which add to the selling price. 
Moving up the process ladder, this same frame could 
be themoformed or compression molded. Additional 
detail could be added to the part and it could be 
molded in one piece. Production speeds would be 
increased and assembly labor costs would be lowered 
but not cömpletely eliminated. Both processes would 
produce large amounts of scrap material because the 
center of the frame would have to be trimmed out. 
If thesc same frames were injection molded, the 
problems experienced with extmsion and either 
thermoforming or compression molding could be 
climinatcd. Millions of frames could be produced 
with little scrap and no assembly labor costs. This 
would make the cost per item the [owest of all 
manufacturing processes; 
however, the capital 
investment required for equipment and tooling would 
be much higher. 

EXTRUSION PROCESS 
Plastics Exuusion Pnocessing is defined as convefiing 
plastic powder or granules into a continuous uniform 
melt and forcing this melt through a die which yields 
a desired shape. The continuous extruded shape 
moves through the cooling section and at some point 
is cut to the desired length. It is held in the desired 
shape until cooled so that an end product can be 
tealized. Some common items produced by the 
*trusion process include house siding, pipe, tubing, 
trim, plastic sheets, plastic wrap, etc. 

The plastic is introduced into the screw 
where friction and external heat sources 
melt it so that it reaches the extrusion 
die system in a totally melted state. 
The melted plastic is forced through a 
die or dies of the appropriate size and 
shape for the finished product being 
produced. 
The finished palt is cooled and cut to length. 
The method of cooling depends upon the product 
being produced. Sheet products are cooled and sized 
on highly polished and liquid cooled rollers. Pipe 
and tubing are cooled through simple open water 
troughs or pulled through vacuum sizing tanks, where 
the melt is held in a sizing sleeve for a short time in a 
water filled vacuum chamber. Other products are 
cooled by forced air or water spray methods. 
The screw of the extruder is the only mechanical 
feature which parallels the injection molding process. 
This process does not require the high injection 
pressure or mold clamping as is typical in injection 
molding. 
Note: Due to the continuous screw feeding of the 
plastic material, shear heats in excess of the specified 
plastic processing temperatures can be reached. If 
this happens. the heating bands used for stalt-up will 
be turned off and air blowers will be turned on and 
monitored by thermocouples to maintain the proper 
processing temperature.  

COMPRESSION / TRANSFER MOLDING 
Compression / Transfer molding generally uses 
themwset plastics. It has an advantage in the fact 
that the system involved is relatively simple. In 
compression molding the plastic material is placed 
in a heated cavity and the mold halves are closed 
under high pressure for the required cure time. 
Tooling costs are relatively moderate because of 
the simplicity of the molds in comparison to 
injection molds. 
The equipment for compression molding consists 
of two vertically opening platens which close 
together. A mold is placed between these platens. 
Heat and clamp pressure are applied to the mold 
which forms the material into the desired shape 
and supplies the catalyst which cures the plastic. 
Most Compression Presses are hydraulically 
operated. The platens move up and down on four 
corner posts under pressures that generally range 
from 20 to 1000 tons. 
Heat is provided by a variety of methods 
depending on the equipment. Presses are available 
that use steam, electrical heating elements, hot oil, 
or hot water as the heat source. 
The compression molding machine has the 
clamping and in some cases the ejection features of 
the injection molding machine. Generally none of 
the features associated with the injection unit of the 
injection molding machine will be found on a 
standard compression molding machine. 
Higher production machines are available which 
use injection units. Care must be taken to heat the 
plastic only enough to move the material into the 
mold. Higher temperatures would cause the 
thermoset material to permanently solidify 
chemically in the barrel. 
COMPRESMON AND TRANSFER MOLDING 
The molding press for these two molding methods is 
similar. The difference is in the mold itself. In 
Compression molding, the plastic material is placed 
in the heated mold cavity. When the pre-wanmed 
plastic material has reached a consistency of putty, 
the mold is closed causing the softened plastic to 
assume the shape of the mold cavity. After it has had 
sufficient time to cure, the mold is opened and the 
finished molded part is removed. Overfill wells are 
provided to accomodate the difference in plastic 
matelial mequired by the mold and the slight amount 
of extra material contained in the puck to assure the 
cavity is filled. 
Transfer molding works on much the same principle. 
The primary difference is in how the plastic material 
enters the mold cavity. In transfer molding, the mold 
is loaded into the press in a closed condition. A well 
is incorporated into the top plate of the mold. A 
specific amount of pre-warmed plastic, whether in 
granular, pellet, or puck form, is placed into this well 
relative to the cavity shot size. A small amount of 
*tra material is included to assure proper packing- 
Within the actual mold, channels are cut to deliver 
the plastic to the cavity or cavities. In the case of a 
multiple cavity mold, a mnner system would be 
incorporated. Once the plastic has reached the 
orocessing temperature, the press is slowly closed, 
oushing down on the plunger. The plunger forces the 
'lastic down through the sprue plate and into the 
tunners and channels of the mold which canies the 
31astic into the mold cavity. Instead of overfill wells 
as in compression molding, the additional material 
remains in the cull. This allows for a parting line 
which generally will not require trimming. After the 
plastic has time to cure under a controlled 
temperature and pressure, the press is opened and the 
mold removed. The mold is then opened and the 
spme removed from the cull (the cull is the excess 
plastic left in the well to assure proper packing). This 
allows the molded part along with the lunner, 
applicable, and sprue to be removed from the mold as 
a unit. The sprue is trimmed in a secondary operation 
if it feeds directly into the part as illustrated. 
There are more sophisticated compression / transfer 
molding machines in use that do many of the above 
covered steps automatically including ejection of the 
finished part. 
THERMOFORMING PROCESS 
Thermoforming is the forming of extrusion molded 
thermoplastic sheet with heat and pressure (or 
vacuum) to force the hot sheet of plastic against a 
mold face. It is the fabrication method by which the 
most pounds of thermoplastic materials are converted 
into useful end products. By starting with an 
extruded sheet of plastic and a mold, using heat and 
air pressure or vacuum, the sheet is drawn into a 
wanted form. 
All of the variations in fuming techniques have a 
common ground in getting movement (stretching, 
forming) of the heated sheet by applying air pressure, 
vacuum, or a combination of the two. Depending on 
the details to be reproduced from the mold, either of 
these methods might be used. When very high 
pressures are needed, a chamber is sealed to the top 
side of the sheet and pressures are built up within the 
chamber by the use of compressed air or steam. Such 
a pressure system can produce very fine surface 
details when used with oriented materials. 
STRAIGHT VACUUM FORMING 
STRAIGHT FORMING OR CAVITY FORMING 
1) The heated sheet of plastic is clamped over a 
cavity or mold box. 
2) Air pressure is used to force the heated 
plastic sheet against and into the shape of 
the mold. 
3) The part is cooled and removed from the 
mold. 



A positive mold may be used inside a mold box. 
Parts made by straight forming in a cavity will have 
two predictable features; (1.) the sharpest details will 
be on the outside of the part and (2.) the thickest 
sections will be at the extemal corners and the 
thinnest sections will be at the internal corners of the 
plastic part. 
None of the features (clamping, injecting, and 
ejecting) are comparable in the same form as 
injection molding in the thermoformng process. 
1)A sheet of plastic is placed over the surface 
of the tool (mold). 
2)Heat is applied to bring the plastic to the 
right fon•ning temperature.  
3)The air between the mold and the plastic 
sheet is removed causing a vacuum thus 
pulling the plastic down around the mold. 
4) The molded part is cooled and removed 
from the machine. 
5.) The part is trimmed to specifications. 

EXTRUSION-BLOW MOLDING 
Extrusion-Blow Molding is the process most 
commonly used for 
the production of hollow 
thennoplastic components such as bottles, jars, toys, 
fuel tanks, etc. 
The extmsion process is defined as making a product 
by forcing material through an orifice or die. The 
exfiusion-blow molding process consists of five 
steps: 
1) extrusion of the plastic parison (hollow 
plastic tube) 
2)closing of two mold halves around the 
parison, clamping the mold, and cutting the 
parison thereby sealing off the bottom of the 
tube much like a balloon 
3) blowing the parison against the cooled walls 
of the mold cavity, calibrating the opening, 
and holding it under air pressure during the 
cooling time 
4) opening the mold and removing the blown 
part 
5) finishing the part by trimming off the flash 
from the overflow areas

 


 
The Exhusion-B•Iow Molding machine illustrated 
above has two molds which move left and right 
during operation and two blow stations. While the 
right mold is receiving an extruded parison, the 
parison in the left mold is being blown. Once the 
blown pan has cooled and been ejected from the left 
mold, the table moves to the right so that the now 
empty left mold can receive a parison and the parison 
in the right mold can be blown. 
Plastic delivery is much the same as in the Extrusion 
process in that the screw extrudes the material and 
there is no need for high pressure injection. In 
addition to the screw on the injection side, Extmsion- 
Blow molding incorporates mold clamping as in 
injection molding. There is, however, no need for 
exteme high pressure clamping as found in injection 
molding. 

INJECTION STRETCH-BLOW MOLDING 
Injection Stretch-Blow Molding is a three or four 
stage process for producing completely finished 
plastic containers. 
Stage 1: The plastic is injection molded into a 
preform cavity where a preform is created. The neck 
finish (threads) of the container is molded as well as 
the shape of the preform, as the plastic is injected 
around the core pin and into the prefonn mold. 
Stage 2: In four stage machines, the preform is 
temperature conditioned (brought up to the correct 
temperature for stretching and blowing) at this stage. 
The temperature conditioning takes place at stage 1 
on three stage machines. 
Stage 3: The Blow Mold closes around the preform 
and a stretch rod enters the prefonn from the top and 
stretches the hot plastic to the bottom of the mold. At 
the same time, high pressure air is introduced to blow 
the preform out to the shape of the blow mold cavity. 
Stage 4: After a sh01t cooling period the finished 
container is ejected from the machine. 
Injection-Blow molding offers many imponant 
advantages in the production of plastic containers. 
It produces scrap flee, close tolerance, 
completely finished containers that require 
no secondary operation. 
It offers positive weight control in the finished 
container (accurate to ± 0.1 a). 
Neck shapes and finishes can be molded 
with extreme accuracy (± 0.004 inch). 
Container weights and dimensions are 
repeatable. 
The stretching of the plastic bi-axially orients it 
which greatly increases its strength. 
This process incorporates a full injection molding 
machine and couples it with a system as found in 
Extrusion-Blow molding to blow injection molded 
forms into irregular shapes which are not able to be 
injection molded due to coring. 
ROTATIONAL MOLDING 
Rotational molding is a process for producing hollow 
products of all sizes and shapes without cores or air 
assist. Since it does not lequire high injection 
pressures, high shear rates, or precise metering of 
plastic, the molds and machinery for rotational 
molding are normally low cost and long lasting. 
The basic process is quite simple. 
1) Powdered,granulated or liquid polymer (plastic) 
is placed in a mold. 
2) The mold is heated while being rotated a b o u t 
two pelpendicular axes simultaneously. Duri ng 
the first part of the heating stage, when molding 
with powdered material, a porous skin is forned 
on the mold surface. This gradually melts as the 
cycle pogresses to form a homogeneous layer of 
unifonn thickness. When, a liquid material is 
used, it flows and coats the mold surface until 
the gel temperature of the resin is leached, at 
which time all flow stops. 
3) The mold is then indexed into a cooling station 
where it is cooled by forced air or water spray. 
4) It is then positioned in a work zone, where the 
mold is opened, the finished part removed, and 
the mold recharged with material for the next 
cycle. 
The most popular rotomolding system uses a 
horizontal rotating unit commonly called a carousel. 
This usually has three arms on which molds are 
mounted. The arms can be indexed automatically 
from station to station. 
Various types of heating systems have been used but 
the cleaner, lower-cost, safer operation offered by hot 
air has caused this to be the most widely used system. 
None of the systems associated with high pressure 
injection molding are incorporated into a rotational 
molding machine. 

INJECTION MOLDS 
hele are many mechanical features which 
can be incorporated within an injection mold 
in order to fonn detail found in Injection 
molded pans. There are also various ways for melt 
flow to enter a plastic part. Gate location can be 
crucial to finished molded pmt strength and integrity. 
Gate style or location can also lessen or conceal the 
melt entw point (gate) if strategically placed. 
Some of the most popular plastic part filling and palt 
ejection variations will be covered in the following 
chapters. It is important to remember that the 
combinations of the variations found in the following 
chapters, as well as some not covered because of 
their low percentage of incorporation, are governed 
by: 
The budget of the project 
The imagination of the Design Engineer 
The budget of the mold building project (dictating the 
number of cavities and quality of the design) is 
usually governed by the philosophy of the purchasing 
company and the speed of production required in 
conjunction with the total number of plastic parts 
needed. In other words, the number of cavities 
required in a mold as well as the total number of 
molds required is determined by asking these 
questions: 
How may pans are needed in what span of 
time? 
Based on a plastic part of this design 
and plastic material used, how fast can the 
mold be expected to run (cycle time)? 
How many hours per day and days per week 
are allotted to run this mold? 
What size molding machines are available? 
With this infonnation and a fonnula allowing for 
somewhat less than 100 percent efficiency (to 
account for mold maintenance and tangible and 
intangible inefficiencies) mold cavitation can be 
determined. 

STANDARD MOLD WITH AN 
EJECTOR PLATE ASSEMBLY 
The Standard Mold with an ejector plate assembly is 
generally used when parting line runners are 
acceptable and ejector pins, sleeves or blades are 
adequate to remove the molded plastic parts from the 
mold. 
The illustration on the next page shows the "A" half 
plan view of a two cavity mold. The view is looking 
at the face of the parting line of the "A" half, 
(stationary half) of the mold. 

1. LEADER / BUSHINGS - A pin and 
bushing system used to control the alignment of the 
mold plates. One side of the mold contains the pin 
and the other the bushing. There are four pins & 
bushings per mold, located at the outer comers. One 
bushing set is offset from the others to control the 
correct assembly. The affected offset corner is 
identified by an stamped on the appropriate 
comer of the mold base. It is normally found on the 
top of the mold on the operator side. 
2. MOLD BASE SCREWS - Usually socket head 
cap screws (SHCS) which are used to hold the mold 
base plates together. 
3. JIFFY CONNECTORS - A standard purchased 
item which functions as a water connector. It is used 
as a quick means to separate molding machine hoses 
from the mold. The male part is screwed into the 
mold and the female part is fixed to the molding 
machine water service. These connectors sometimes 
contain a water shut-off device and allow a quick 
connect or disconnect of the cooling water supply to 
the mold. They must be sized so as not to restrict the 
water flow designed within the mold. 
4. SPRUE - The primary feed channel from the 
injection unit to the runner channel. It is conical in 
shape with *its small diameter mating with the 
injection unit This small diameter breaks away from 
the the molding machine melt flow at the nozzle 
when the mold opens. The sprue is pulled from the 
"A" side on mold opening and ejected with the 
runners. 
S. EYE BOLTS - These are used to lift the plates 
and/or the whole mold. Vatious sizes are used 
depending on the weight they must lift. Large plates 
have eye bolts on all four sides for safe handling. 
Each mold has one eye bolt hole positioned on top of 
the mold at the center of gravity. This main eye bolt 
is generally located in a separate lift strap which 
straddles and connects the "A" and "B" halves 
together so that the two halves do not accidentally 
come apan while being lifted. (See Lift Straps on 

6. LOCATING-RING - This locates the mold in the 
molding machine. It profiudes approximately 7/32" 
above the top clamp plate sulface and locates into a 
matching recess in the molding machine. The 
locating ring provides central location between the 
mold and molding machine. Adjustments must be 
made rotationally for mold perpendicularity before 
clamping the mold in place. 
7. CAVITY - (Ref. page 4-11) The cavity generally 
produces the external or outside features of the part 
being molded. The cavity shape is a void or 
impression that is machined into the steel. Note that 
the term 'Cavity Side" has become synonymous with 
the "A" side of the mold. Cavities are generally 
made of heat treated materials which are compatible 
with, but not necessarily the same as, the core heat 
treated materials. 
8. CLAMPING SLOTS - Slots cut into both sides 
of the mold and usually running vertically in the 
press. They are used to clamp the mold to the 
molding machine. They must be machined long 
enough to provide for four clamps on each mold half. 
1. SUPPORT PILLARS • Solid diameter or 
inegular shaped bars of suitable length to span the 
distance between the back of the "B" suppout plate 
and the inside surface of the bottom clamp plate. 
They generally fixed to the bottom clamp plate 
and a clearance hole is machined through the ejector 
plates. They help support the mold under injection 
and clamping force. Larger molds may require that 
suppolt pillars be ground with a slight pre-load to 
prevent plate flexing under high injection force. 
2. GREASE FITTINGS Purchased items which 
provide a way to lubricate remote guide pin bushings 
as well as leader pin bushings by a path cut through 
the mold base to the bushings. They are generally 
machined flush with the mold base. 
3. RETURN PINS A headed pin usually 5/8" or 
3/4" in diameter incorporated to prevent accidental 
cavity damage by ejector pins, sleeves or blades. It is 
retained between the ejector plates and passes 
through the mold to the main parting line. On mold 
opening with the ejector plates in the forward 
position, they generally protrude beyond the parting 
line. 
If, on mold closing, the ejector plates have not moved 
back through molding machine activation or spring 
returned ejector plates, these pins are pushed back 
upon contact with the "A" half of the mold. This 
action, if implemented, returns the ejector plates to 
the remward position thereby aborting cavity 
damage. 
4. LEADER PINS / BUSHINGS- (Ref. page 4-3) - 
A pin and bushing system used to control the 
alignment of the mold plates. One side of the mold 
contains the pin and the other the bushing. There are 
four pins & bushings per mold, located at the outer 
comers, one bushing set is offset from the others to 
control the conect assembly between the two halves 
of the mold. The affected offset comer is identified 
by an "01' stamped on the appropriate corner of the 
mold base. It is normally found on the top of the 
mold on the operator side. 
5. GUIDED EJECTION - An integral part of the 
ejector mechanism used to control the alignment of 
the ejector and the ejector retainer plates. It usually 
consists of a bronze coated bushing and a standard 
guide pin. The bushing is fitted in the ejector 
assembly plates and is held in place by the bushing's 
shoulder in the ejector plate. The guide pin is 
generally retained in the bottom clamping plate and is 
suspended through the guided ejector bushing in the 
ejector plates and continues through to the bottom of 
the support plate. There are generally four in each 
mold, one in each quadrant with the set in the "O" 
corner being off-set. 
6. HOLLOW DOWEL -(A1so know as a Tube 
Dowel) In this case it is used to align the support 
plate, the rail housing and the "B" plate. Hollow 
dowels are generally positioned in the offset comer 
and the corner diagonally opposite of the offset 
corner. They are designed to align the mold plates at 
their O.D. and allow the fastening screws to pass 
through their I.D. 
7. JIFFY CONNECTORS (Ref page 4-3) A 
standard purchased item which functions as a water 
connector. It is used as a quick means to separate 
molding machine hoses from the mold. The male part 
is screwed into the mold and the female part is fixed 
to the molding machine water service. These 
connectors sometimes contain a water shut-off device 
to allow a quick connect or disconnect of the cooling 
water supply to the mold. They must be sized so as 
not to restrict the water flow designed within the 
mold. 
8. SPRUE PULLER A feature which assists the 
removal of the sprue from the sprue bushing. It can 
be an undercut, machined into the mold and located 
on the same centerline as the splue or it can also be a 
pin with an undercut shape machined into its end 
which protrudes into the melt flow path. The 
undercut feature varies with the plastic material 
requirements. (Ref. page 4-28) 
9. EJECTOR PINS - (Also known as Knock-out or 
K.O.pins) A headed pin which is used to push the 
molded parts and/or runners from the mold. The pin 
is held in the mold between the ejector plate and the 
ejector retainer plate. These plates control the 
movement of the pins on the ejection stroke. 
Running clearance is related to the O.D. of the pins 
as well as the flash factor of the plastic material being 
injected into the mold. 
10. CORE A feature which produces holes or 
internal shapes in a molded part. They can be of any 
shape: round. square, etc. Cores are generally made 
of heat treated materials which are compatible with, 
but not necessarily the same as, the cavity heat 
treated materials. Cores may be used to form 
features with a mechanically functional purpose or 
simply to provide for even, consistent wall sections 
of the plastic pan. 

MOLD BASE - This is the entire unit which retains, 
aligns and suppomts the molding insert components 
and all optional auxiliary equiplnent such as the 
hydraulic cylinders, unscrewing mechanisms, 
electrical connectors, etc. The mold base is 
considered everything except the heat treated mold 
cavity and core stack assembly. 
El A" SIDE - Considered to be the part of the mold 
which clamps to the injection side of the molding 
machine. It may also have moving plates which are 
activated upon mold opening. This half of the mold 
is clamped to the stationary platen of the molding 
machine. The "Atl side generally contains the cavity 
and it's related components. 
"B" SIDE - This is the moving side; the part of the 
mold which is attached to the moveable half or 
"clamp" side of the molding machine. The "B" side 
generally houses the core and itts related components. 
Nonnally the mold is designed so that the molded 
part stays on the core upon mold opening to be 
ejected by activation of the ejector assembly. 
1. LIFT STRAP - A correctly sized (for the weight 
of the mold) bar or strap, generally made from low 
carbon steel or similar metal. It is fastened to the top 
of the mold and spans all moving plates on "B" side 
and "All side. In effect, it holds both halves together 
and provides a surface to attach an eye bolt for lifting 
the mold. The position of the lifting eye bolt is 
placed over the center of gravity of the mold so that 
the mold does not tilt when lifted. 
2. CORE - (Ref. page 4-8) A feature which 
produces holes or internal shapes in a molded part. 
They can be of any shape; round, square, etc. Cores 
generally made of heat treated materials which 
are compatible with, but not necessarily the same as, 
the cavity heat treated materials. Cores may be used 
to form features with a mechanically functional 
purpose or simply to provide for even, consistent wall 
sections of the plastic pan. 
3. CAVITY - (Ref. page 4-4) The cavity generally 
produces the external or outside features of the pan 
being molded. The cavity shape is a void or 
impression that is machined into the steel. Note that 
the term "Cavity Side" has become synonymous with 
the "A't side of the mold. Cavities are generally 
made of heat treated materials which are compatible 
with. but not necessarily the same as, the core heat 
treated materials. 
4. PARTING LINE INTERLOCKS - This is a 
system used to align the two mold halves together. 
The interlock consists of a male and female piece that 
align with a close sliding fit. They obtain a final 
close tolerance alignment oveniding that of the 
looser tolerance Leader pin and bushings as well as 
the molding machine tie bars. Straight interlocks 
should be used when delicate shut-offs protrude from 
one half of the mold to the other. When shut-offs are 
not an issue, tapered interlocks are an acceptable 
option. 
5. STEPPED INSERT BORES - A slight change 
in the upper and lower bore sizes (usually 1/16" or 
1/8"). They are inccnporated in any mold plate and 
corresponding round insert ("A" or "B" side) which 
carries radial water cooling. The purpose is to 
provide a smooth uninterrupted ramp for O-rings to 
enter their seats without tearing. 

1. TOP CLAMP PLATE - The plate which is used 
to locate and secure the mold to the 'IA" side of the 
molding machine. This plate canies the locating Ting 
and generally the head of the sprue bushing. It is 
aligned to the "N' plate with tube dowels. It can also 
serve as a flat, ground surface for the cavities to rest 
upon. 
2. A" PLATE - The plate which holds the cavity 
inserts, any optional cavity slide cores and 
mechanisms retracted before P/L opening, and water 
cooling lines. The sprue bushing passes through it en 
route to the P/L. The "A" plate is aligned to the "B" 
plate with leader pins and P/L interlocks (if 
applicable). 
3. It BIT PLATE - This plate holds the core inserts, 
core pins, any optional slide core pins retracted after 
P/L opening but before ejection, and water cooling 
lines. Alignment of the "Bli plate to the support plate 
is governed by tube dowels. 
NOTE: The 'tA" and '1B" plates are generally 
0.0005" to 0.002" thinner than the height of the 
cavity or core on cold runner molds which have 
runners on the main parting line. This helps assure 
good P/L shut-offs. The flash factor of the plastic 
being used will detennine the exact amount. 
4. SUPPORT PLATE - Any plate which backs up 
the core or cavities. The best example would be the 
"B" support plate in a standard mold base as 
illustrated above. The support plate can provide a 
flat, ground surface for the cores to rest on. 
5. EJECTOR RAILS - These rails provide the 
clearance needed to allow the ejector plates to travel 
forward during ejection of the part while maintaining 
the mold stack height. Rails are generally attached to 
a bottom clamp plate depending on the application 
and are notched to provide for the molding machine 
clamps. They are aligned to the bottom clamp plate 
and the support plate with tube dowels. 
6. - 7. EJECTOR PLATES - ( Detail 6 is the 
Ejector Retainer Plate, Detail 7 is the Ejector Plate) A 
set of moving plates, usually two, fastened together 
to hold the ejector pins and retum pins as well as any 
optional ejector sleeves, blades or lifters. They are 
located inside the ejector housing and slide along the 
guided ejector pins on bushings. They are generally 
activated by the molding machine's ejector system 
which is sequenced to operate at the required moment 
in the molding cycle. A 2-stage ejector system will 
have 2 sets of ejector plates. 

8. MOLD BASE SCREWS - fief. page 4-3) - 
Usually socket head cap screws (SHCS) which are 
used to hold the mold base plates together. 
9. WATER LINES - Water channels - drilled holes 
or machined shapes used to convey cooling water 
throughout the mold. Profitable molding is 
extremely dependent upon allowing for the lowest 
amount of time finished molded parts remain in the 
cooling cycle. This is why sizing and positioning of 
water lines are so important. 
10. HOLLOW DOWEL - (ref. page 4-7) - (Also 
know as a Tube Dowel) In this case it is used to 
align the support plate the rail housing and the '1B" 
plate. Hollow dowels are generally positioned in the 
offset corner and the corner diagonally opposite of 
the offset corner. They are designed to align the 
mold plates at their O.D. and allow the fastening 
screws to pass through their I.D. 
11. CLAMPING SLOTS - (ref. page 4-4) - Slots 
cut into both sides of the mold and usually running 
vertically in the press. They are used to clarnp the 
mold into the machine, They must be machined long 
enough to provide for four clamps on each mold half. 
12. BOTTOM CLAMP PLATE The plate which 
is used to secure the mold to the "B" side of the 
molding machine. When used in conjunction with a 
set of rails, the assembly is known as an ejector 
housing (See item #14). Clearance holes are 
provided for the MKO studs (see item # 18) 
13. MOLD BASE SCREWS Longer version of 
item #1. In this case they are used to attach the 
bottom clamp plate, ejector rails, support plate and 
"B" plate together. They usually run through a 
hollow dowel or dowels in the off-set comer and the 
corner diagonally across from it. (see item #10) 
14. EJECTOR HOUSING - A structure, usually on 
the 'IBC' side of the mold, which caries the ejector 
mechanism. This structure may be a one piece 
weldment of the ejector rails and the bottom 
clamping plate or a three piece assembly screwed and 
doweled together. 

15. SUPPORT PILLARS - (ref. page 4-6) solid 
diameter or irregular shaped bars of suitable length to 
span the distance between the back of the "B" support 
plate and the inside sulface of the bottom clamp 
plate. They are generally fixed to the bottom clamp 
plate and a clearance hole is machined through the 
ejector plates. They help support the mold under 
Injection and clamping force. Inger molds may 
require that suppofl pillars be ground with a slight 
pre-load to prevent plate flexing under high injection 
force. 
16. - 17. GUIDED EJECTION ( Detail 16 is the 
Guided Ejector Bushing and Detail 17 is the Guided 
Ejector Pin) (ref. page 4-7) - An integral part of the 
ejector mechanism used to confiol the alignment of 
the ejector and the ejector retainer plates. It usually 
consists of a bronze coated bushing and a standard 
guide pin. The bushing is fitted in the ejector 
assembly plates and is held in place by the bushing's 
shoulder in the ejector plate. The guide pin is 
generally retained in the bottom clamping plate and is 
suspended through the guided ejector bushing in the 
ejector plates and continues through to the bottom of 
the suppolt plate. There are generally four in a mold 
with one set in each quadrant. The set located in the 
"O" comer is usually offset. 
18. MKO STUDS - (Machine Knock-out studs) - 
Usually a hexagonal bar tapped 1/2-13 on one end 
and threaded 1/2-13 on the opposite end. They fasten 
to the ejector plate or su•ipper plate. The tapped end 
ties into the molding machine ejector system. This 
assuaes a positive forward and retum action for the 
ejector plates. MKO studs should be flush with the 
back of the bottom clamping plate. When this is 
done, the molding machine requires only one set of 
ejector bars which come flush with the face of the 
"B" platen. 
1. EJECTOR PINS - oef. page 4-8) - (Also known 
as Knock-Out or K,O.pins) A headed pi_n which is 
used to push the molded parts and/or runners from 
the mold. The pin is held in the mold between the 
ejector plate and the ejector retaining plate. These 
plates control the movement of the pins on the 
ejection stroke. Running clearance is related to the 
0.1). of the pins as well as the flash factor of the 
plastic material being injected into the mold. 
2. SPRUE PULLER - (ref. page 4-7) A feature 
which assists the removal of the sprue from the sprue 
bushing. It can be an undercut machined into the 
mold and located on the same centerline as the spue 
or it can also be a pin with an undercut shape 
machined into its end which proü-udes into the melt 
flow path. The undercut feature varies with the 
plastic material requirements. 
3. STOP BUTTONS - A headed pin with its shank 
diameter lightly press fitted into tbe rear of the 
ejector plate or into the inside surface of the bottom 
clamp plate. The head rests between the ejector plate 
and the inside surface of the bottom clamp plate. The 
air space created by the head thickness allows any 
foreign matter to be dispelled from the ejector 
housing and provides for easily 
controllable 
establishment of the ejector pin base datum point. 
4. RETURN PINS (ref. page 4-6)- A headed pin 
usually 5/8" or 3/4" in diameter incorporated to 
prevent accidental cavity damage by ejector pins, 
sleeves or blades. It is retained between the ejector 
plates and passes through the mold to the main 
paning line. On mold opening with the ejector plates 
in the forward position, it generally protrudes beyond 
the parting line. If, on mold closing, the ejector 
plates have not moved back through molding 
machine activation or spring returned ejector plates, 
these pins are pushed back upon contact with the 
half of the mold. This action, if implemented, returns 
the ejector plates to the rearward position thereby 
aborting cavity damage. 
5. SPRINGS / COIL - Normally purchased items 
that can be obtained in various lengths, diameters 
and load factors. They are used to move desired 
components or assist in their movement. Purchased 
springs are generally color-coded to denote the 
tension strength. Springs are not considered a 
positive method of movement. If a positive 
movement is required then a positive mechanical 
movement must be engineered within the mold to 
assure that the movement will occur. Note: Spring 
life expectancy is relatively sh01t if springs are 
compressed more than 35% of their free length 
during mold operation. 
6.-7. LEADER PIN BUSHINGS / LEADER PINS 
- (ref, page 4-3) - A pin and bushing system used to 
control the alignment of the mold plates. One side of 
the mold contains the pin and the other the bushing. 
There are four pins & bushings per mold, located at 
the outer comers. One bushing set is offset from the 
others to control the correct assembly. The affected 
offset corner is identified by an 'O" stamped on the 
appropliate corner of the mold base. It is normally 
found on the top of the mold on the operator side. 
8. LOCATING RING - The locating ling locates 
the mold in the molding machine (It provides central 
location only). It protrudes approximately 7/32" 
above the top clamp surface and locates into a recess 
in the molding machine stationary platen. 
9. SPRUE - (ref. page 4-3) This is the primary feed 
channel from the molding machine injection unit to 
the runner channel. It is a conical shape with its 
small diameter mating with the injection unit. This 
small diameter breaks away from the molding 
machine melt flow at the nozzle when the mold 
opens. The sprue is pulled from the "A" side on mold 
opening and ejected with the runner. The orifice of 
the sprue is sized according to the plastic material 
being molded. Small orifices are used on easier 
flowing, shear resistant materials. Larger orifices are 
needed on spmes feeding materials which are shear 
sensitive and molds which require large unounts of 
plastic per shot. 